---
layout: post
title: "Marvellous Merchiston"
date: 2023-12-03
---


Marvellous Merchiston
=====================


John Napier, 8th Laird of Merchiston, was always destined to be a wizard.


### Humble Beginnings


His father, Sir Archibald, developed a reputation for wizardry after betting 500 crowns with various people
 (about £50,000 in today's money) that Mary, Queen of Scots, would break out of Lochleven by May 5th. She
 broke out on May 2nd, perhaps aided by his wizard powers.


Worse still, Sir Archibald married the sister of the Bishop of Orkney who, despite her brother's standing in
 the clergy, was known by the newspaper to be a "notorious necromancer". Napier's path was set from
 birth.


It didn't help that he spent a lot of time on his own in a big tower. When he came out, he would pace around
 in long robes. At a certain point, he started really leaning into the evil wizard thing.


### Wizard Phase


Napier kept a black rooster as a familiar. He also often kept a spider in a box with him, but that's not
 relevant for anything.


He once suspected that one of his servants was stealing from him. So he gathered them up and told them to go into
 a nearby dark, ominous room and pet his magical cockerel. He said the rooster would be able to sense the touch
 of a thief, and it would cry out in response. The servants went in and came out without any noise


Then he commanded them to turn over their hands. For you see, with his powers of divination, he had covered the
 rooster in soot. All but one servant had black hands.


He appears to have done a reasonable amount of things like this. When pigeons were stealing his grain, he cast
 some kind of spell to daze and stun them, keeping them on the ground where they could be easily caught. Or maybe
 he covered the grain in alcohol. We'll never really know. Either way it looked pretty necromantic.


He was also a prolific inventor, devising a metal chariot that was immune to musket blasts and two new kinds of
 burning mirrors for setting distant things on fire. He also wrote a very successful book prophesying the
 apocalypse and accusing the pope of being the antichrist, which would go on to be translated into French,
 German, and Dutch.


### Forgotten By History


Despite his incredible life and times, Napier has suffered the cruellest fate that can be inflicted on a
 trailblazer: he is remembered mostly for his contributions to mathematics. To him we owe both the logarithm and
 the convention of using a decimal point.


Was he a wizard? Was he just some kind of weird goth polymath with a knack for coming up with weird tricks?
 We'll never really know for sure. Perhaps there's no real difference.



