---
layout: post
title: "Meta"
date: 2023-12-03
---


Meta
====


What is this site?
------------------


It's kind of a blog, but also kind of like a big document. It used to be more of a blog, but I found that writing new posts was stressful because a bunch of people I liked signed up to get them emailed, and I simultaneously wanted to write out all my thoughts, and also have nice self-contained emails, and also have some high context stuff.


So I gave up on the emails, nuked the old site, and decided to go for a flatter structure that's more directly pointed at the thing I want to have on the internet: a representation of my actual thoughts and opinions about some stuff, for anyone who's interested.


I want to be able to edit things, move them around, nest them, have big posts and little posts. I also want to actually stick my fingers in the code a bit more. So here we are.


How is it set up?
-----------------


Basically it's vanilla html, css, and js, running on Firebase. I usually write locally in vscode or on a markdown-to-html converter. Previously, I uploaded files directly from my computer, but now they go through a github repo which automatically deploys every time it updates. Every page starts with me copying and pasting a snippet of html that looks like this:
 



```
<body>

    <script src="/scripts/boilerplate.js"></script>
</body>
```

That "`boilerplate.js`" is a little helper script I wrote which does everything other than the text for me: it loads the css, adds the page header, and gives each page a title based on the first heading in the body of the page. This is so that I can edit those things centrally.


There are no libraries anywhere, and the only thing loaded externally is the font. This is more or less irrelevant, but it pleases me aesthetically.


Frequently asked questions
--------------------------


### Why did you not just use a templating system


I guess I was just not that invested in setting one up when I first built this site, and now it would be a pain. Plus I find it sort of aesthetically pleasing to do things with client-side javascript even though I do recognise that it's somewhat of an abomination.


### ^?


It's a caret. I use it to track and denote unfinished things a bit like a proofreading caret, although those are usually lower, like this: ‸. 


I also like it as a neutral icon which nods at exponentiation. Something something working in public, shipping before you're ready, compounding growth.



